---
title: Logistics
order: 60
---
One of the technologies that has profoundly re-shaped the world in the last few
decades — often without people even seeing the transformation that has happened
— is the shift to a “just in time” manufacturing and supply through logistics.
Again, this is a transformation that is deeply based on analytics, and is
closely related to the principles of scientific management, especially the
pursuit of efficiency and impact on a company’s bottom line.

Once upon a time, stores would order their produce based on a mixture of
experience and intuition — the “rule of thumb” that scientific management had
begin to erase from production. In the holiday season, stores would estimate,
for example, the number of turkeys that they’d need to meet demand. This is
risky. If you get the estimate wrong, people get unhappy: if the store
estimates too few, they sell out, and customers go without or buy elsewhere; if
they estimate too many, then there are turkeys left over that they have to sell
off cheaply, losing money.

Today, all this has changed. Point-of-sale computers track every purchase, and
central databases know exactly[^1] what the stock it is in every store.
Algorithms can predict what the required stock is likely to be, and adapt their
stock levels and transport to compensate, so in theory there is much less risk
that we are unable to buy what we need.

Online shopping doesn’t remove this issue, but it does change it somewhat. If
the store is Amazon-sized, and can run its own warehouses, then exactly the
same principle applies, except on a larger scale, because now your single
warehouse may be selling to an entire country rather than a single town.

But what is interesting is that the move online enables an entirely new kind of
store to exist — stores which have no inventory whatsoever, and literally
manufacture and ship on demand. Amazon itself does this for books. After all,
they stock over 33 million titles, and if they needed to stock 30 of each,
that’s a billion books, weighing in at around 250,000 tons of book — about the
weight of a large modern cruise ship! Not exactly the kind of thing you want to
have to keep in your warehouse. So instead, they will print and assemble books
on demand. And if printing and assembling a book takes them a day or so, you’d
not notice that when it’s integrated into the shipping time.

This isn’t limited to books, either. In fact, perhaps the single most important
influence of scientific management was in improving the efficiency of the way
that businesses supply each other, before they even complete a product that
they can sell.

This is a simple example and shows the basic principle, but exactly the same
problem applies if you are building a product, and the consequences are even
worse if it goes wrong. For example, imagine you run a pizza store. You need
ingredients from a whole range of suppliers, and if you run out of any of them,
your menu may be limited or you may even have to close your store entirely.

What data and analytics provided was a new way to improve the efficiency of a
business, by helping them reduce wastage, and reduce the amount of materials
that they need to keep in stock. However, ultimately, this all depends on a
transparent sharing of our usage. Without item-by-item tracking of every single
purchase, both by consumers and by businesses, the whole stack of cards will
come falling down.

Even so, it also depends on algorithms predicting what we humans will do,
correctly, and that can go wrong all the time. Early in the COVID pandemic,
fears of supply led to the Great Toilet Paper Shortage of 2020[^2], with severe
shortages and rationing in stores. This was wholly driven by human behaviour,
as on average, the amount of toilet paper needed by a single human each month
does not change all that much.

However, there were changes. Suddenly, people were working more from home, so
instead of depending on workplace supplies for about a third of the day, so
we’d expect a rise in demand of maybe 50%. So what did happen?

1. People were hoarding, buying an entire case when they’d never normally have
done. In fact, in one month in the US, the amount of toilet paper sold more
than doubled.

2. The commercial and home products are not the same — and they aren’t packaged
the same — so it’s not simply a case of redirecting your favourite
kitten-branded products to your local pharmacy rather than sending it to an
office building. For one thing, they don’t have the right barcodes for a local
store.

3. Reflexivity — a shortage of toilet paper affects society, leading to an
unexpectedly increased demand for toilet paper. Cognitive biases included the
availability heuristic and prospect theory. Not only were we immersed in media
messages about the Great Toilet Paper Shortage, the costs of having too little
compared to too much toilet paper were very asymmetric. Nobody cares about
storing a few extra rolls, but running out was unthinkable! In other words,
what happened was a very sudden feedback loop, which meant that the algorithmic
predictions were entirely wrong because the factors influencing human
decision-making had changed.

A few months later, of course, the whole issue had been flushed out of mind —
although there are likely some people who are still working through their
stocks from 2020, even today.

However, this is all a nice clean city-dwellers version of events. Place is
about much more than that. Imagine the remote areas in Canada’s north, where
there are no all-year-round roads. Everything falls. Toilet paper isn’t made in
Churchill, Canada, so it all has to be brought in, by air. That changes the
rules and polarizes the structure, so supply easy and cheap in some locations,
but hard and expensive in others.

The same process happens on a global scale. There are “command and control”
cities where the corporations set up their headquarters, but these are not the
same cities where anything (apart from ideas and management instructions) get
produced. There are “research and development” clusters, usually centred on
universities and centres of education, to provide the technically skilled
workforce needed. There are production centres, often offshore and in the
Global South. Again, all of this is specifically enabled and coordinated by (a)
modern use of data and analytics, and (b) scientific management methods.
Without that pairing, the coordination needed to make this efficient would not
be possible.

And this division is not fixed. For corporations of this size, it might cost
many millions to switch production from one country to another, but they can
 afford it, and at the right scale it is still economically effective to do so.

[^1]:
    Well, not exactly. All sorts of losses can apply, especially when produce is 
    time-sensitive. These errors make the problems harder, but don’t change the 
    fundamental principles.

[^2]:
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/coronavirus-toilet-paper-shortage-panic/2020/04/07/1fd30e92-75b5-11ea-87da-77a8136c1a6d_story.html