---
title: "The Matthew effect"
order: 55
---
> “For to every one who has will more be given, and he will have abundance; but
> from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away” Matthew 25:29, RSV.

One of the great myths of the modern world — and especially capitalism — is
that somehow Smith’s “invisible hand” is benevolent, even providential.

The unfortunate reality is that all too often, those who have the advantages of
privilege get that strengthened rather than weakened: “success breeds
success”[^2]. Put simply, by default, the rich get richer and the poor get
poorer. This is the Matthew effect. It’s a powerful phenomenon that occurs in
most competitive systems.

And it is obvious if you think about it. Imagine two people on social media
have both written a book: one has a million followers, the other has a hundred.
Which of the two would you think is likely to get the most sales? We don’t need
to know anything about the book, the title, the quality, all of that is
irrelevant to the Matthew effect.

It’s also easy to demonstrate experimentally. Salganik, Dodds, and Watts
designed an elegant experiment. Two groups of people were asked to rate songs
in a music marketplace. One of the groups worked independently, with no way to
find out how other people felt about the same songs. The other group could also
see a score, based on how many times each song had been downloaded by others.
What the researchers found was that the success of a particular song was more
unpredictable when people could the download score. What’s more, if the results
are presented in order, rather than randomly, then success was even more
unpredictable, and even more disconnected from the actual song itself.

The Matthew effect was originally used to describe career success in academic
life, but in practice it also applies to financial success, fame, fashion.

[^2]:
    https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2014/04/140428154838.htm
