---
title: 'New positivism'
order: 60
---

In the world of data science, there is a strong undercurrent of a modern
positivism, where methodology has become more important than epistemology.
Instead of debating what reality is, we talk more about what data is valid,
whether our studies are reproducible, and so on. As Baudrillard might have put
it – he loved his vivid metaphors – our reality has been eaten by our data
analysis.

This trend is visible in data science too: there’s a strong trend to
quantitative over qualitative methods, and a preference for structured data
over unstructured data.

By comparison with the social sciences, this is significant. By and large,
social scientists gave up on positivism many decades ago, because of
positivism’s constant search for objective and absolute principles underpinning
society.

One of the recurrent patterns we see in the social sciences is a mirroring
between a philosophical view and a pragmatic view, and positivism is no
exception. Alongside the philosophical concept of positivism, there is a ‘naive
positivism’, an everyday version if you like, which holds that outside the
academic world of philosophy, in our daily life, we actually act as if there
are general laws.

And there is a very panopticonish aspect to positivism. It is transparent, but
asymmetric. Those in the know can see the patterns, but the patterns themselves
are not immediately obvious to those participating in it. It is firmly based in
observation. Judgement is normal. The Panopticon was designed as a strictly
scientific solution to the problem of crime (or education, or work, depending
on your particular social needs).

In fact, in the modern world of artificial intelligence, there is even a 
tendency to see AI algorithms as 'magic positivist bullets' -- able to identify
and extract the pure essence of reality from the mass of conflicting evidence,
theory, and data that immerse us. If anything, positivism is on the ascendant.

But there is a fundamental tension between the theoretical aspect and the 
methodological aspect.

Here are a few examples:

* Randomized clinical trials as the gold standard for medical interventions.

